Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends for this...
23rd Sunday of Ordinary Time, we're reading from the 14th chapter of Luke, and this is very serious spiritual business.
We're talking, if you want to put it this way, very high octane.
Spirituality.
Remember the story of the rich young man? Yeah.
This young kid full of, you know,
Because good spiritual enthusiasm comes to Jesus. What must I do to attain eternal life? And Jesus first speaks of the commandments. And the young guy says, you know, with confidence. And I'm moving.
And I believe them. I've kept all these from my youth. Yeah.
And then Jesus says, looking at him with love, mind you.
Um,
Well, are you willing to sell all you've got?
And give to the poor and follow me.
And the young kid went away sad because he was living the spiritual life at a decent level.
But he wasn't ready for the serious stuff
Think of a, um,
You know, a kid that's showing promise in football and the coach recognizes he plays the basics well.
And then he wants to draw him into the really serious playing of the game.
The physical.
Demands and then the strategic thinking and all that that's required to play the game at a really high level.
Or a young kid that's good at the basics of piano.
And you can even master, you know, high level pop songs and a little Gershwin and, you know,
The teacher goes, okay, now...
Maybe you're ready for Chopin, for Beethoven, and so on.
Well, there's something similar in the spiritual order.
And the trouble is a lot of us sinners, we're kind of satisfied with low-level spirituality. What I mean is, we're like the rich young man.
Hey, you know, I'm a decent person. I'm not killing people and I'm not stealing and I'm not committing adultery and I don't lie too often.
You know, I'm following the commandments. I go to Mass, you know, pretty regularly. Yeah.
Well, great. You know, great. Nothing wrong with that because the commandments are the basic level, if you want. It's the rudiments of the spiritual life.
But when the church gives this
This challenge, it's born of Jesus, of course. This challenge, this challenge.
To live it really seriously.
To move into the upper levels of the spiritual life. Most of us
Bark.
Not ready for that. It's a little too much.
will.
With that in mind, look at this extraordinary reading.
And,
Let me say this at the outset.
1.
To domesticate this.
Or think it away or it's always just symbolic talk.
Listen to Jesus now.
If anyone comes to me
without
hating his father and mother.
wife and children
Brothers and sisters,
Even his own life
He cannot be my disciple.
Okay, now put yourself in this
place, the crowd hearing this from Jesus. They recognize him. Sure, he's a rabbi, he's a spiritual teacher, he's a miracle worker, and they're very intrigued by him.
But then he lays out
To use Bonhoeffer's terms here, the cost of discipleship.
If anyone comes to me and wants to be my disciple, I'm going to die
Without heeding father and mother
Wife and children
Brothers and sisters,
Even his own life.
He cannot be my disciple.
Now, look, I know I've heard a hundred sermons on this and have read the relevant text that will stress that in Jesus' Aramaic, this language of like hate and love,
It was not so much of either or. It was a sense of prioritization. Yeah.
Okay, there's truth enough to that.
But see, I don't want us.
To to soften this language too much
This is meant to be a kind of shock therapy.
You're taking discipleship seriously? Well, here's what it entails. Now, let me try to parse this out.
For you.
I think there's a,
A more positive and a more negative way maybe we could assess this
First of all,
Do we sinners have the tendency?
To make
Of very good things
The ultimate good.
No, I mean father and mother.
Wife and children
Brothers and sisters,
good things. well of course.
And the Society of Jesus, the Jewish Society of the First Century, very family-centric.
Uh,
Culture.
Are these good relationships? Of course they are. Of course they are.
However,,
They're not the supreme good.
The Sumum Bonum.
Only God
is the supreme good.
What's the first commandment? You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, all your soul, all your mind, all your strength, all your
Who comes first?
See, and this is where everybody, it gets challenging.
It can't be my mother.
it can't be my father.
It can't be my brothers or sisters.
And,
It can't even be my own life that comes first.
God must come first.
So what if God's making a demand?
That's at odds with what my father and mother want.
God is the supreme good.
God makes a demand in my life that means I'm alienated from my brothers and sisters.
Okay
Press it.
God makes a demand.
that requires that I surrender my life
Now,
All the martyrs.
All the great martyrs.
Faced exactly that.
Decision.
What do you decide?
Oh, I hope I never come to that. Yeah, I know. I know. We all do.
But if you did,
what would you decide?
Unless you hate your mother and father. See, interpret that as unless you are a mother and father.
able to put your mother and father second to the demand of God.
You can't be my disciple.
Okay. Unless you put your love for your brother and sister second to your love for God. Okay.
You can if you're my disciple. Now, think about the parent.
Unless,
You can put your love for your child
Second, to your love for God. Now revisit that awful story.
in the book of Genesis.
When God says to Abraham,
You know, Isaac, your beloved, your son, Isaac, the son of the promise. You know, Isaac, whom you love. I want you to sacrifice him to me.
Is it God being cruel? No, it's the same lesson. It's the same lesson.
A spiritual exercise if you want.
Do you love me more than you love even your beloved child?
Unless that's the case.
You're not ready to be my follower.
You see what I mean everybody when I say this is high octane stuff.
This is for the very spiritually serious.
Now, I said there were two levels. That's a more positive one.
But now move it to that second more negative level.
And keep in mind what I mentioned to you last Sunday about pride.
So, first thing is, can I put God above?
Even these highest goods.
But can I also recognize
The ways that pride
Has perverted and twisted all of these relationships.
Out of self-regard
I mean, can I start using my mother and father for my own benefit?
Can I manipulate them as part of my scheme of life?
Or think of parents that live vicariously in an manipulative way through their children.
My brothers and sisters, do I involve them in my own kind of prideful, egotistic games?
Can you see how everybody
In the measure that we do all that,
We should hate these relationships.
See, I'm not saying in themselves are bad. I'm saying in the measure that they've been twisted by pride, right?
They become spiritually toxic.
I should hate them.
I should repudiate them.
See, very often in the spiritual order, people, they're enthusiastic about following the Lord.
But they're not willing to let go.
Of the twisted, weird parts of their life.
They're not willing to let go of the of the prideful way that I manipulated and abused people around me.
I don't want to let go of that.
Again, I'm using...
a dumb example, but it always helps me to
So if you're learning something,
The proper golf swing
Well, all of us bad golfers have this bad swing in place. We're doing it the wrong way.
Everything about our swing is off.
You have to hate that swing.
Right. You have to hate it. You have to repudiate it. You can't make compromises with it. Like, well, I'll try to fit a little bit of that into my... No, no. That's a bad swing. Right.
It's been serving you very poorly all these years, and you've got to go through the painful transition to a whole new way of striking the ball.
And compromising, playing games. I'll do a little bit of this, a little bit of that. It's not going to work, right?
Do you see how you have to hate people?
The ways that your relationships and your style has
Crippled you spiritually.
If you're not,
You're not ready for the Lord Jesus. You're not ready for real discipleship.
This is, you know, in the Old Testament terminology,
Israel hankering for the flesh parts of Egypt, right?
Oh, if only we were back in Egypt.
even though we were slaves in Egypt. But, oh, if only we were back there, we had enough to eat.
Yeah. Come on, you're not ready for the promised land if that's the way you're thinking. Yeah.
you know oh let me go back to these old manipulative habits and these old prideful ways that i i related to people around me. no no you have to hate.
you have to hate all of that.
If you're
willing to follow the Lord Jesus.
Now, look how he sums this up.
Whoever does not carry
His own cross.
And come after me.
cannot be my disciple.
Hey, hey, hey. I know. I know. Look, I'm a sinner. You're sinners. And so this is a really hard talk.
They, they knew about crosses, carrying the cross, what the cross meant.
And we hold it up in front of us all the time, the cross of Jesus. What does it mean?
It means,
I'm I'm stripped of wealth
I'm stripped of pleasure. I'm stripped of power. I'm stripped of honor. Of all these things that my prideful self wants,
I'm stripped of all these things. Listen.
That I have tended to make
Into absolute goods
Right?
"Hey, what's my life all about?" And you know, you need
a really good spiritual director or confessor that will help you with this. And I don't mean someone that's going to tickle your ears and tell you what you want to hear. I mean someone that's really
really good and really clear.
He will say.
What is your life really about?
Oh, it's about serving God.
Really?
I want an honest answer. I want a searching moral inventory of your life. What's it about?
What do you get out of bed every morning in order to accomplish?
Now,
If we sinners are honest.
We'll probably say some version of wealth or power or pleasure or honor or self-protection, you know?
The old prideful self.
Unless you're willing to take up your cross and your cross means
Being stripped of all of that.
Those aren't your ultimate goods. And all those weird twisted ways that the prideful self has used those things and manipulated others through them.
through them and
All of that
you have to hate
If you want to follow the Lord Jesus,
Um.
Hard stuff.
Uh-huh.
A cost of discipleship?
You bet.
You know, my generation got a lot of the kind of easy peasy spirituality, you know, God is love and just, you know, try to be kind and be a good person and,
Well, yeah, I mean, nothing wrong with being a good person. I'm a little favored being a good person
But that's the rudiments, everybody. That's the basis of the spiritual life.
Serious stuff? Serious stuff? The high-octane stuff?
Look at this Luke chapter 14.
Unless you,
Hate all these things unless you can put them in in a lower place.
Unless you can affirm God as the supreme good in your life.
You're not ready to follow the Lord.
And so,
You know, don't don't domesticate this, as I say, let the
At the deep, deep challenge of these words, seep all the way down into your soul. I'm speaking to myself. I'm into my soul.
right?
If we're serious about being disciples of the Lord Jesus,
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.